          She can help you find the path.

                         NEO
          She helped you?

                         MORPHEUS
          Yes.

                         NEO
          What did she tell you?

                         MORPHEUS
          That I would find the One.

DING.  The ELEVATOR opens.


INT.  HALL

The long dark hall beckons.  Neo follows Morpheus out of
the elevator and the doors rattle shut behind him.  With
every step, a disturbing sense of inevitability closes in
around him.

At the end of the hall, Morpheus steps to the side of a
door.

                         MORPHEUS
          I told you that I can only show you
          the door.  You have to step through
          it.

Neo blows out a breath.  His hand reaches but stops,
hovering over the spherical handle.  He backs away.

                         NEO
          Morpheus, I don't think this is a
          good idea.

                         MORPHEUS
          Why?

                         NEO
          I told you I don't believe in this
          stuff.  No matter what she says I'm
          not going to believe it, so what's
          the point?

                         MORPHEUS
          What do you believe in?

                         NEO
          What do I believe it?  Are you
          kidding me?  What do you think?  I'm
          still trying to deal with the fact
          that everything I believed was real,
          wasn't.  The whole world, my entire
          life was a lie.  I don't know
          anything anymore, Morpheus.

                         MORPHEUS
          That's why we're here.

                         NEO
          Why?  So I can hear some old lady
          tell me, what?  That I'm this guy
          that everybody's been waiting for?
          The one that's supposed to save the
          world?  Come on.  How do I respond
          to that?  I can't.  It's ridiculous.
          I mean who am I?  I'm nobody, I'm
          just a guy.  What did I do,
          Morpheus?  Why me?

                         MORPHEUS
          Faith is beyond the reach of whys
          and why nots.  These things are not
          a matter of cause and effect, Neo.
          I do not believe things with my
          mind.  I believe them with my heart.
          In my gut.

                         NEO
          And you still believe I'm the One?

                         MORPHEUS
          Yes I do.

                         NEO
          Yeah?  What about the other five
          guys?  The five before me?  What
          about them?

Morpheus tries to hide his heart being wrenched from his
chest.

                         NEO
          Did you believe in them too?

                         MORPHEUS
          No.  I did not.  I have never told
          anyone this, Neo.  After I saw the
          Oracle I thought... no, I
          misunderstood what she told me.  I
          believed that it was all about me.
          That I would find the One, not that
          he would find me.

This is difficult for Morpheus to admit.

                         MORPHEUS
          I believed that all I had to do was
          point my finger and anoint whoever
          I chose.  I was wrong, Neo.
          Terribly wrong.  Not a day or night
          passes that I do not think of them.
          After the fifth, I lost my way.  I
          doubted everything the Oracle had
          said.  I doubted myself.

He looks up at Neo.

                         MORPHEUS
          And then I saw you, on the Net,
          searching for me and everything
          changed.  I felt this charge, this
          electricity through my whole body.
          I started laughing and tears poured
          out of my eyes, because I knew, I
          knew that you were the One.

His eyes blaze.

                         MORPHEUS
          Listen to me, Neo.  I know why
          you're afraid to go through that
          door.  You can't get free of
          thinking that I could be wrong.  You
          must believe me.  There is a
          greatness inside of you, Neo.  A
          greatness that is going to lift you
          to unimaginable heights and that in
          time will change the world.

                         NEO
          Morpheus, I don't know --

                         MORPHEUS
          I know.  That is why it is so
          important for you to go.  Please,
          Neo, I'm asking you to find whatever
          respect you may have for me and
          trust me.

Neo feels a rush from Morpheus' intensity, the
unadulterated confidence of a zealot.

                         NEO
          All right.

He reaches for the handle which turns without him even
touching it.  A WOMAN wearing white opens the door.

                         PRIESTESS (WOMAN)
          Hello, Neo.  You're right on time.


INT.  ORACLE'S APARTMENT

It seems particularly normal.

                         PRIESTESS
          Make yourself at home, Morpheus.

                         MORPHEUS
          Thank you.

                         PRIESTESS
          Neo, come with me.

She leads Neo down another hall and into what appears to
be a family room.

There is another woman in white sitting on a couch
watching a soap opera.  Scattered about the room are a
half dozen children.

Some of them are playing, others are deep in meditation.
All of them exude a kind of Zen calm.

                         PRIESTESS
          These are the other Potentials.  You
          can wait here.

Neo watches a little girl levitate wooden alphabet blocks.
Closer to him, a SKINNY BOY with a shaved head holds a
spoon which sways like a blade of grass.

In front of him is a pile of spoons bent and twisted into
knots.

Neo crosses to him and sits.  The boy smiles and hands Neo
the spoon which is now perfectly straight.

                         SPOON BOY (SKINNY BOY)
          Do not try to bend the spoon.  That
          is impossible.  Instead, only try to
          realize the truth.

                         NEO
          What truth?

                         SPOON BOY
          That there is no spoon.

Neo nods, staring at the spoon.

                         NEO
          There is no spoon.

                         SPOON BOY
          Then you will see that it is not the
          spoon that bends.  It is only
          yourself.

The entire room is reflected inside the spoon and as Neo
stares into it, it slowly begins to bend until --

A hand touches his shoulder.

                         PRIESTESS
          The Oracle will see you now.

Spoon Boy smiles.

She takes him to the last room, parting a curtain that
leads into a kitchen.

                         ORACLE
          Just come on in.


INT.  KITCHEN

An OLD WOMAN is huddled beside the oven, peering inside
through a cracked door.

                         NEO
          Hello?

                         ORACLE (OLD WOMAN)
          I know.  You're Neo.  Be right with
          you.

                         NEO
          You're the Oracle?

                         ORACLE
          Bingo.  Not quite what you were
          expecting, right?  I got to say I
          love seeing you non-believers.
          Always a pip.  Almost done.  Smell
          good, don't they?

                         NEO
          Yeah.

                         ORACLE
          I'd ask you to sit down, but you're
          not going to anyway.  And don't
          worry about the vase.

                         NEO
          What vase?

He turns to look around and his elbow knocks a VASE from
the table.  It BREAKS against the linoleum floor.

                         ORACLE
          That vase.

                         NEO
          Shit, I'm sorry.

She pulls out a tray of chocolate chip cookies and turns.
She is an older woman, wearing big oven mitts, comfortable
slacks and a print blouse.  She looks like someone's
grandma.

                         ORACLE
          I said don't worry about it.  I'll
          get one of my kids to fix it.

                         NEO
          How did you know...?

She sets the cookie tray on a wooden hot pad.

                         ORACLE
          What's really going to bake your
          noodle later on is, would you still
          have broken it if I hadn't said
          anything.

Smiling, she lights a cigarette.

                         ORACLE
          You're cuter than I thought.  I see
          why she likes you.

                         NEO
          Who?

                         ORACLE
          Not too bright though.

She winks.

                         ORACLE
          You know why Morpheus brought you to
          see me?

He nods.

                         ORACLE
          So?  What do you think?  You think
          you're the One?

                         NEO
          Honestly?  I don't know.

She gestures to a wooden plaque, the kind every kitchen
has, except that the words are in Latin.

                         ORACLE
          You know what that means?  It's
          Latin.  Means, 'Know Thyself'.  I'm
          gonna let you in on a little secret.
          Being the One is just like being in
          love.  Nobody can tell you you're in
          love.  You just know it.  Through
          and through.  Balls to bones.

She puts her cigarette down.

                         ORACLE
          Well, I better have a look at you.

She widens his eyes, checks his ears, then feels the
glands in his neck.

                         ORACLE
          Open your mouth.  Say 'ahh'.

She nods then looks at his palms.

                         ORACLE
          Okay, now I'm supposed to say,
          'Hmmm, that's interesting but...'
          Then you say --

                         NEO
          But what?

                         ORACLE
          But you already know what I'm going
          to tell you.

                         NEO
          I'm not the One.

                         ORACLE
          Sorry, kid.  You got the gift but
          looks like you're waiting for
          something.

                         NEO
          What?

                         ORACLE
          Your next life, maybe.  Who knows.
          That's how these things go.

Neo almost has to laugh.

                         ORACLE
          What's funny?

                         NEO
          Morpheus.  He almost had me
          convinced.

                         ORACLE
          I know.  Poor Morpheus.  Without him
          we are lost.  We will never find the
          One.

                         NEO
          What do you mean, without him?

The Oracle takes a long drag, regarding Neo with the eyes
of a Sphinx.

                         ORACLE
          Are you sure you want to hear this?

Neo nods.

                         ORACLE
          Morpheus believes in you, Neo and no
          one, not you or even me can convince
          him otherwise.  He believes it so
          blindly that he's going to sacrifice
          his life to save yours.

                         NEO
          What?

                         ORACLE
          You're going to have to make a final
          choice.  In one hand, you will have
          Morpheus' life.  In the other hand,
          you will have your own.  One of you
          is going to die.  Which one, will be
          up to you.

Neo can't breathe.

                         ORACLE
          I'm sorry, kiddo.  I really am.  You
          have a good soul and I hate giving
          good people bad news.  But don't
          worry, as soon as you walk outside
          that door, you'll start feeling
          better.  You'll remember that you
          don't believe any of this fate crap.
          You're in control of your own life,
          remember?

He tries to nod as she reaches for the tray of cookies.

                         ORACLE
          Here, take a cookie.  I promise by
          the time you're done eating it,
          you'll feel right as rain.

Neo takes a cookie, the tightness in his chest slowly
beginning to fade.


INT.  SITTING ROOM - DAY

Morpheus rises from a couch as the Priestess escorts Neo
out.  When they are alone, Morpheus puts his hand on Neo's
shoulder.

                         MORPHEUS
          There is a rule that no one can ask
          what the Oracle said to you.  What
          was said was said for you and you
          alone.

He smiles.

                         MORPHEUS
          I can see it in your eyes, that you
          are still confused.  That's all
          right, Neo.  Give it time, let it
          all sink in.  I know it can be
          difficult to see the path even when
          it's right under your feet.

Neo nods and takes a bite of his cookie.


INT.  CAR

Neo and Morpheus get in the car.

                         MORPHEUS
          Let's go.

Cypher slaps the car in gear and pulls into traffic.
Trinity looks at Neo who is staring at the final bit of
cookie.  He puts it in his mouth and chews.

                         TRINITY
          Are you all right?

                         NEO
          ... right as rain.


EXT.  CITY STREET - DAY

Switch watches as an unmarked white van trolls by.

                         SWITCH
          Weird.

                         APOC
          What?

                         SWITCH
          That's the third white van I've
          seen.

                         APOC
          Should Tank I.D. it?

Switch sees the black car turn onto their street.

                         SWITCH
          No.  Here they come.


INT.  ROOM 1313 - DAY

Mouse's CELLULAR RINGS.

                         MOUSE
          Welcome to Movie-Phone.

                         TANK (V.O.)
          They're on their way.

The phone flips shut as he jumps up.


EXT.  CITY STREET

Cypher closes the garage door, nervously looking around.
At the end of the alley is another white van.  He mops the
sweat from his forehead, following the others into the
hotel.


INT.  MAIN DECK

Sweat rolls down Cypher's face and neck.  At the
operator's station, Tank is typing rapidly.

                         TANK
          What is that...?


INT.  HOTEL LAFAYETTE - DAY

Light filters down the throat of the building, through a
caged skylight at the top of the open elevator shaft.
Four figures glide up the dark stairs that wind around the
antique elevator.

Neo notices a black cat, a yellow-green eyed shadow that
slinks past them and pads quickly down the stairs.

A moment later, Neo sees another black cat that looks and
moves identically to the first one.

                         NEO
          Whoa.  Deja vu.

Those words stop the others dead in their tracks.


INT.  MAIN DECK

The monitors suddenly glitch as though the Matrix had an
electronic seizure.

                         TANK
          Oh shit!  Oh shit!


INT.  HOTEL LAFAYETTE - DAY

Trinity turns around, her face tight.

                         TRINITY
          What did you just say?

                         NEO
          Nothing.  Just had a little deja vu.

                         TRINITY
          What happened?  What did you see?

                         NEO
          A black cat went past us and then I
          saw another that looked just like
          it.

                         TRINITY
          How much like it?  Was it the same
          cat?

                         NEO
          It might have been.  I'm not sure.

Trinity looks at Morpheus who listens quietly to the
RASPING BREATH of the old BUILDING.

                         NEO
          What is it?

                         TRINITY
          A deju vu is usually a glitch in the
          Matrix.  It happens when they change
          something.

She also listens as the STACCATO BEAT of HELICOPTER BLADES
GROWS ominously LOUD.


INT.  MAIN DECK

Tank sees what was changed.

                         TANK
          It's a trap!


INT.  STAIRCASE - DAY

Morpheus looks up the stairs as a helicopter shadow passes
over the clouded glass.

                         MORPHEUS
          Come on!


INT.  BASEMENT - DAY

Heavy bolt cutters snap through the main phone cable.


INT.  ROOM 1313 - DAY

Mouse goes to the draped windows as his CELLULAR RINGS.
He answers it.

                         TANK (V.O.)
          They cut the hardline!  It's a trap!
          Get out!

Mouse yanks open the curtain.

                         MOUSE
          Oh no.

The windows are bricked up.  Mouse spins as the RUMBLE of
COMBAT BOOTS BUILDS, then EXPLODES into the room.


INT.  MAIN DECK

Tank watches helplessly.

                         TANK
          No, no, no.


INT.  STAIRS - DAY

Morpheus stops as MOUSE'S SCREAM is drowned out by the
REPORT of MACHINE GUN FIRE.


INT.  ROOM 1313 - DAY

Mouse sails backwards as BULLETS POUND him against the
blood-spattered brick window.


INT.  MAIN DECK

Mouse's body thrashes against its harness, blood coughing
from his mouth in one final spasm, then lying perfectly
still.  The FLATLINE ALARM softly cries out from the life
monitor.


EXT.  HOTEL LAFAYETTE - DAY

More police cars arrive as cops break open the lobby
doors.


INT.  STAIRWELL - DAY

Flying downstairs, Morpheus stops, hearing POLICE SWARMING
below.  He turns and rushes down the hall of the eight
floor.  At the end of it, he finds the bricked up windows.

                         CYPHER
          That's what they changed.  We're
          trapped.  There's no way out.

The sound of HEAVY BOOTSTEPS close around them with the
mechanical sureness of a vice.

                         MORPHEUS
          Give me your phone.

                         TRINITY
          They'll be able to track it.

                         MORPHEUS
          We have no choice.


INT.  MAIN DECK

Tank answers the call.

                         MORPHEUS (V.O.)
          Tank, find a structural drawing of
          this building and find it fast.

His fingers pound the keyboard.


INT.  HOTEL LAFAYETTE - DAY

Flashlights probe the rotting darkness as the police
search every floor.


INT.  MAIN DECK

The diagram windows onto the screen.

                         TANK
          Got it.

                         MORPHEUS (V.O.)
          I need the main wet-wall.


INT.  HALL - DAY

Agent Smith pauses, his hand going to his earpiece.


INT.  ROOM 808 - DAY

Morpheus is guided by Tank.

                         TANK (V.O.)
          Now left and that's it in front of
          you.

                         MORPHEUS
          Good.

He cuts off the phone.


INT.  HALL - DAY

Agent Smith hears the LINE CLICK dead.

                         AGENT SMITH
          Eighth floor.  They're on the eighth
          floor.


INT.  STAIRWELL - DAY

Cops flood the eighth floor, rushing everywhere.


INT.  ROOM 808 - DAY

Several COPS sweep through the room.  It is empty.  As
they pass the bathroom, we see a man-sized hole smashed
through the plaster and lathe.


INT.  WALL - DAY

They are inside the main plumbing wall, slowly worming
their way down the grease black stack pipes.

Above them, light fills the hole they made to get inside.


INT.  HALL - DAY

Brown turns to Smith.

                         AGENT BROWN
          Where are they?


INT.  ROOM 808 - DAY

The Cops search in silence, straining for a clue, when one
hears something strange near the bathroom.


INT.  WALL - DAY

Cypher has slipped and is wedged between the wall and
several thick supply pipes.


INT.  ROOM 808 - DAY

The Cop leans in, his ear almost against the thin membrane
of plaster separating them.  He can hear whispers, hisses
and a grunt when --

The wall suddenly bulges, shatter-cracking as the Cop
realizes --

                         COP
          They're in the walls!


INT.  WALL - DAY

Trinity pulls Cypher free just as the Cop OPENS FIRE --

BULLETS PUNCHING shafts of light like swords into the box
of soot-black space.

Neo finds his GUN first and begins BLASTING blindly
through the plaster and lath.


INT.  ROOM 808 - DAY

The Cops spins out of the bathroom for cover, Neo's
BULLETS SPLINTERING the door jamb.

About to whirl back in, he freezes as something seems to
seize hold of him.  The Cop's body starts to spasm and his
M-16 falls to the ground, long shadows springing up from
the mounted flashlight.


INT.  WALL - DAY

Neo listens for a moment, the gunfire quiet when he hears
FOOTSTEPS rising fast.

Two arms suddenly smash through the wall, punching Neo
back against the iron stack pipe, fingers gouging into his
neck.

                         NEO
          Fuck.

His gun clatters down the dark crevice.

                         TRINITY
          It's an Agent!

Just as Neo's throat is about to collapse, Morpheus
explodes through the tattered plaster and lath, diving on
top of Agent Smith.

The two men crash to the wet terrazzo floor.  Before Agent
Smith can find his weapon, Morpheus is on him, pinning him
in an iron grip.

In the crawlspace, Trinity tries to scramble up past
Cypher.

                         TRINITY
          Morpheus!

Morpheus squeezes Agent Smith's throat.

                         MORPHEUS
          Trinity, you must get Neo out.  Do
          you understand?  He is all that
          matters.

Neo suddenly glimpses what is happening but is powerless
to stop it.

                         NEO
          No.  No!  Morpheus!  Don't!

                         MORPHEUS
          Trinity!  Go!  Get to the basement.
          Find the catch basin!

Behind his crooked glasses, Agent Smith smiles.

                         AGENT SMITH
          The sewers.  Of course.

                         MORPHEUS
          Hurry!

                         AGENT SMITH
          They won't make it.

Trinity's fists ball in frustration.  She yells down to
Apoc.

                         TRINITY
          Go!

                         NEO
          We can't leave him!

                         TRINITY
          We have to!

She grabs his ankle and they begin almost falling using
the lath as a brake, skidding down the inside of the wall.


INT.  BASEMENT - DAY

This part of the basement, a dark concrete cavern, was the
main mechanical room.  There are four enormous boilers,
dinosaur-like technology that once pumped hot water like
arteries.

Apoc is the first to smash through in a hail of dirt and
plaster, landing in the middle of an enemy search unit.
Apoc doesn't let them suffer too long.

Immediately, he is on them, a long blade flashing in his
hand in wide, bloody electric arcs, feet kicking, bones
breaking.

Switch drops next to him from the wet wall.  Whipping out
small, full AUTOMATIC MACHINE GUNS, she begins laying down
cover FIRE as more men surround them.

Blinding lights cut open the darkness as gas-masked
figures FIRE GRENADE LAUNCHERS.

Smoke blossoms from the green metal canisters.

Trinity never stops moving.  Searching the floor, she
finds what she needs; the cover of the catch basin.

Cypher watches her pry open the grate, when a gas can
bounces near him.

                         TRINITY
          Come on!

Cypher seems to trip as the cloud envelops him.

Trinity watches Cypher disappear into the smoke, then
follows the others down the wet-black hole.


INT.  ROOM 808 - DAY

Morpheus and Agent Smith remain on the ground, locked in
each other's death grip.

                         AGENT SMITH
          The great Morpheus.  We meet at
          last.

                         MORPHEUS
          And you are?

                         AGENT SMITH
          Smith.  I am Agent Smith.

                         MORPHEUS
          You all look the same to me.

Agent Smith counters Morpheus and slowly begins to pry his
hands from his throat.

Striking like a viper, Morpheus drives a vicious head butt
into Agent Smith's face.  His nose and glasses shatter.

Morpheus flips up over Agent Smith, about to run, but
lands in front of a wall of men.  Agent Smith rises behind
him, tossing off the broken sunglasses.

                         AGENT SMITH
          Take him.

The wall of Cops rush Morpheus, filling the tiny bathroom
until he disappears under the tide.


INT.  MAIN DECK

Tank reaches out to the screen as if reaching for
Morpheus.

                         TANK
          No!


EXT.  HOTEL LAFAYETTE - DAY

Cypher is carried out, handcuffed, his body still shaking,
mucus bubbling out his nose.  Agent Jones nods to Agent
Brown.

                         AGENT JONES
          We have them now.


EXT.  STREET - DAY

A manhole cover cracks open.  Two eyes peek out just as a
TRUCK RATTLES over it.  The THUNDER DOPPLERS AWAY and the
cover opens.

Neo, Trinity, Switch and Apoc climb out.  Trinity pulls a
waterlogged phone from her pocket.

                         TRINITY
          We need a phone.


INT.  MAIN DECK

Tank is again at the monitors, searching the Matrix.

                         TANK
          We gotta find the others.  They're
          still alive.

The PHONE RINGS.

                         TANK
          Operator.

                         CYPHER (V.O.)
          I need an exit!  Fast!

                         TANK
          Cypher?


EXT.  STREET - DAY

Cypher is standing at a public phone.  Across the street
is the burning paddy wagon that appears to have collided
with an oncoming car.

                         CYPHER
          There was an accident.  A fucking
          car accident.  All of a sudden.
          Boom.  Jesus, someone's going to
          make a believer out of me.

                         TANK (V.O.)
          I got you.

                         CYPHER
          Just get me outta here.

                         TANK (V.O.)
          Nearest exit is Franklin and Erie.
          An old appliance store.

Cypher hangs up and smiles as the fire trucks arrive.


INT.  MAIN DECK

The PHONE RINGS.  Tank answers.

                         TANK
          Operator.

                         TRINITY (V.O.)
          Tank, it's me.


EXT.  STREET - DAY

They are outside a pawn shop.  Trinity has a new cellular.

                         NEO
          Is Morpheus alive?

                         TRINITY
          Is Morpheus still alive, Tank?

                         TANK (V.O.)
          Yes.  They're moving him.  I don't
          know where yet.

                         TRINITY
          He's alive.

Again, inevitability seems to cinch around Neo.

                         TRINITY
          We need an exit!

                         TANK (V.O.)
          You're not far from Cypher.

                         TRINITY
          Cypher, I thought --

                         TANK (V.O.)
          So did we.  I sent him to Franklin
          and Erie.

                         TRINITY
          Got it.


INT.  APPLIANCE STORE - DAY

Dead machines, eviscerated and shrouded with dust lay on
metal shelves like bodies in a morgue.

Plywood covering a small window is ripped off and Cypher
crawls inside.

Deep in the back room, a PHONE that has not rung in years
begins to RING.


EXT.  STREET - DAY

Trinity sees the appliance shop.


INT.  MAIN DECK

Tank punches the exit command.

                         TANK
          Got him.

Cypher's body twitches in its harness, jerking itself
awake.


INT.  APPLIANCE STORE - DAY

Neo crawls through the window that Cypher opened.


INT.  MAIN DECK

Tank finishes loading the exit program as Cypher pulls
back a heavy blanket, exposing a high-tech rifle.


INT.  APPLIANCE STORE - DAY

The PHONE begins to RING as the others crawl in.

                         SWITCH
          God, I love that sound.


INT.  MAIN DECK

Suddenly, a white BOLT of LIGHTNING EXPLODES against
Tank's chair, blasting him into the air.

Cypher checks the gun, unable to believe he missed.

                         CYPHER
          Shit.

Tank is on his feet, lunging when Cypher FIRES again,
square into his chest.

                         DOZER
          No!


INT.  APPLIANCE STORE - DAY

The PHONE is still RINGING.

                         TRINITY
          You first, Neo.

Neo answers the PHONE when there is a CLICK.  There is no
signal.  Nothing but silence.

                         TRINITY
          What happened?

                         NEO
          I don't know.  It just went dead.

Trinity listens to the dead line and takes out the
cellular.


INT.  MAIN DECK

The operator PHONE begins to RING.  Cypher steps over the
SIZZLING BODY of Dozer and looks at the monitor.


INT.  APPLIANCE STORE - DAY

Every unanswered RING wrings her gut a little tighter,
until --

                         CYPHER (V.O.)
          Hello, Trinity.

                         TRINITY
          Cypher?  Where's Tank?

                         CYPHER (V.O.)
          He had an accident.

                         TRINITY
          An accident?!


INT.  MAIN DECK

He walks over to Trinity's body, staring down at it
hanging in its coma-like stillness.

                         CYPHER
          You know, for a long time, I thought
          I was in love with you, Trinity.  I
          used to dream about you...

He nuzzles his face against hers, feeling the softness of
it.

                         CYPHER
          You are a beautiful woman.  Too bad
          things had to work out like this.

                         TRINITY
          You killed them.

                         APOC
          What?!

                         SWITCH
          Oh, God.

Wearing Tank's operator headgear, Cypher moves among the
silent bodies.

                         CYPHER
          I'm tired, Trinity.  I'm tired of
          this war, I'm tired of fighting.
          I'm tired of this ship, of being
          cold, of eating the same fucking
          goop every day.  But most of all,
          I'm tired of this jagoff and all of
          his bullshit.

                         TRINITY
          My God.  Morpheus.  You gave them
          Morpheus.

                         CYPHER
          Yes.  You see, the truth is,
          Trinity, that we humans have a place
          in the future.  But it's not here.
          It's in the Matrix.

                         TRINITY
          The Matrix isn't real!

                         CYPHER
          Oh, I disagree, Trinity.  I
          disagree.  I think the Matrix is
          more real than this world.  I mean,
          all I do is pull a plug here.  But
          there, you watch a man die.

He grabs hold of the cable in Apoc's neck, twists it and
yanks it out.

                         CYPHER
          You tell me which is more real.

Apoc seems to go blind for an instant, a scream caught in
his throat, his hands reaching for nothing, and then falls
dead.  Switch screams.

                         TRINITY
          But you're out, Cypher.  You can't
          go back.

                         CYPHER
          That's what you think.  They've
          promised to back me, Trinity.
          They're going to reinsert my body.
          I'll go back to sleep and when I
          wake up, I'll be fat and rich and I
          won't remember a goddamn thing.
          It's the American dream.

He laughs, his hand sliding around the neck of Switch as
he takes hold of her plug.

                         CYPHER
          Welcome to the real world, eh, baby?

She suddenly feels her body severed from her mind as she
is murdered.

                         TRINITY
          Goddamn you, Cypher!

                         CYPHER
          Don't hate me, Trinity.  I'm just
          the messenger.  And right now I'm
          going to prove it to you.

He stands over Neo.

                         CYPHER
          If Morpheus was right, then there's
          no way I can pull this plug, is
          there?

She turns to Neo, eyes wide with fear and he knows he is
next.

                         CYPHER
          If he is the One, then in the next
          few seconds there has to be some
          kind of miracle to stop me.  Right?
          How can he be the One if he's dead?

He takes hold of the cord.

                         CYPHER
          You never did answer me, Trinity,
          when I asked you before.  Did you
          buy Morpheus' bullshit?  Come on.
          You can tell me, did you?  All I
          want is a little yes or no.  Look
          into his eyes, Trinity, those pretty
          blue eyes and tell me the truth.
          Yes or no.

Trinity stares at Neo as a single word falls soundlessly
from her lips.

                         TRINITY
          ... yes.

                         CYPHER
          No!

Cypher is frozen, staring AT us in terror.

                         CYPHER
          I don't believe it!

Charred and bloody, Tank levels the gun.

                         TANK
          Believe it or not, you piece of
          shit, you're still going to burn.

He FIRES a CRACKLING BOLT of LIGHTNING that knocks Cypher
flying backwards.


INT.  APPLIANCE STORE

Trinity throws her arms around Neo and for a moment they
are alone and alive until --

The PHONE RINGS.

                         NEO
          Go.  You first this time.


INT.  MAIN DECK

Trinity's eyes snap open, a sense of relief surging
through her at the sight of the ship.  As Tank unplugs
her, she sees his charred wounds.

                         TRINITY
          Tank, you're hurt.

                         TANK
          I'll be all right.

                         TRINITY
          Dozer?

Tank's face tightens.

                         TRINITY
          I'm sorry, Tank.


EXT.  GOVERNMENT BUILDING - DAY

A government highrise in the middle of downtown where a
military helicopter sets down on the roof.

Agent Jones gets out of the helicopter, flanked by columns
of Marines.  They open the roof access door and enter the
top floor maintenance level of the hotel.


INT.  EXECUTIVE OFFICE - DAY

Agent Smith stands, staring out the windows at the city
below shimmering with brilliant sunlight.

                         AGENT SMITH
          Have you ever stood and stared at
          it, Morpheus?  Marveled at its
          beauty.  Its genius.  Billions of
          people just living out their
          lives... oblivious.

Morpheus is handcuffed to a chair, stripped to the waist.
He is alternately shivering and sweating, wired to various
monitors with white disk electrodes.  Beside him, Agent
Brown sucks a serum from a glass vial, filling a
hypodermic needle.

                         AGENT SMITH
          Did you know that the first Matrix
          was designed to be a perfect human
          world?  Where none suffered, where
          everyone would be happy.  It was a
          disaster.  No one would accept the
          program.  Entire crops were lost.

Agent Brown jams the needle into Morpheus' shoulder and
plunges down.

                         AGENT SMITH
          Some believed we lacked the
          programming language to describe
          your perfect world.  But I believe
          that, as a species, human beings
          define their reality through
          suffering and misery.

Agent Brown studies the screens as the life signs react
violently to the injection.

                         AGENT SMITH
          The perfect world was a dream that
          your primitive cerebrum kept trying
          to wake up from.  Which is why the
          Matrix was redesigned to this:  the
          peak of your civilization.

He turns from the window.

                         AGENT SMITH
          I say 'your civilization' because as
          soon as we started thinking for you,
          it really became our civilization,
          which is, of course, what this is
          all about.

He sits down directly in front of Morpheus.

                         AGENT SMITH
          Evolution, Morpheus.  Evolution.

He lifts Morpheus' head.

                         AGENT SMITH
          Like the dinosaur.  Look out that
          window.  You had your time.

Morpheus stares hard at him, trying not to show the pain
racking his mind.

                         AGENT SMITH
          The future of your world, Morpheus.
          The future is our time.

Agent Smith looks at Agent Brown.

                         AGENT SMITH
          Double the dosage.

Agent Jones suddenly enters.

                         AGENT JONES
          We could have a problem.


INT.  MAIN DECK

Neo looks at Morpheus whose body is covered with a cold
sweat.

                         NEO
          What are they doing to him?

                         TANK
          They're hacking his mind.

                         NEO
          How?

                         TANK
          They inject virus-like serums to
          attack the neuro-systems.  It's like
          cracking a computer.  All it takes
          is time.

                         NEO
          How much time?

                         TANK
          Depends on the mind.  But
          eventually, it will crack and his
          alpha pattern will change from this
          to this.

Tank punches several commands on Morpheus' personal unit.
The monitor waves change from a chaotic pattern to an
ordered symmetrical one.

                         TANK
          When it does, Morpheus will tell
          them anything they want to know.

                         NEO
          What do they want?

                         TANK
          Every leader of every ship is given
          the codes to Zion's mainframe
          computer which can be accessed only
          through the Matrix.  They are used
          only in emergencies.  If an agent
          had those codes and got inside
          Zion's mainframe they could disable
          the entire defense system.  It would
          be the end of everything.

He looks up at Trinity who is pacing relentlessly.

                         TANK
          We can't let that happen, Trinity.
          Zion has to be protected.


INT.  GOVERNMENT BUILDING

Morpheus is fighting to hold his mind together.  The
agents stand over him.

                         AGENT SMITH
          Never send a human to do a machine's
          job.

                         AGENT BROWN
          If, indeed, Reagan had failed, they
          will sever the connection as soon as
          possible, unless --

                         AGENT JONES
          They are dead.  In either case --

                         AGENT SMITH
          We have no choice but to continue as
          planned.  Deploy the sentinels.
          Immediately.


INT.  MAIN DECK

Trinity sees Cypher's dead body.  Rage overtakes her and
she kicks him.

                         TRINITY
          Goddamnit!  Goddamnit!

                         NEO
          There has to be something that we
          can do.

                         TANK
          There is.  We have to pull the plug.

                         TRINITY
          You're going to kill him?  Kill
          Morpheus?!

                         TANK
          Trinity, we don't have any other
          choice.

Neo suddenly sees it perfectly clear, fate rushing at him
like an oncoming train.

Tank kneels beside Morpheus' body.

                         TANK
          Morpheus, you were more than our
          leader.  You were... our father.  We
          will miss you, always.

Trinity can't bear to watch.  As she closes her eyes, her
tears slip free.

Tank takes hold of the plug.

Neo is paralyzed, his whole life is suddenly suspended by
the finality of this moment hurling at him with the speed
of a bullet.

Tank closes his eyes --

                         NEO
          Stop!

They both look at him.

                         NEO
          Goddamnit!  I don't believe this is
          happening!

                         TANK
          Neo, this has to be done!

                         NEO
          Does it?  I don't know.  This can't
          be just coincidence.  It can't be!
          Can it?

                         TANK
          What are you talking about?

                         NEO
          The Oracle.  She told me this would
          happen.  She told me...

Neo stops, his stare fixed on Morpheus.

                         NEO
          That I would have to make a
          choice...

                         TRINITY
          What choice?

He makes his choice.  Turning, he walks to his chair.

                         TRINITY
          What are you doing?

                         NEO
          I'm going in after him.

                         TRINITY
          You can't!

                         NEO
          I have to.

                         TRINITY
          Morpheus sacrificed himself so we
          could get you out!  There's no way
          you're going back in!

                         NEO
          Morpheus did what he did because he
          believed that I'm something I'm not.

                         TRINITY
          What?

                         NEO
          I'm not the One, Trinity.  The
          Oracle hit me with that too.

Trinity is stunned.

                         TRINITY
          No, you... have to be.

                         NEO
          I'm sorry, I'm not.  I'm just
          another guy.  Morpheus is the one
          that matters.

                         TRINITY
          No, Neo.  That's not true.  It can't
          be true.

                         NEO
          Why?

                         TRINITY
          Because...

Uncertainty swallows her words and she is unable to tell
him what she wants to.

                         TANK
          Neo, this is loco.  They've got
          Morpheus in a military-controlled
          building.  Even if you somehow got
          inside, those are agents holding
          him.  Three of them!  I want
          Morpheus back, too, but what you are
          talking about is suicide.

                         NEO
          I know that's what it looks like,
          but it's not.  I can't logically
          explain to you why it's not.
          Morpheus believed something and he
          was ready to give his life for what
          he believed.  I understand that now.
          That's why I have to go.

                         TANK
          Why?

                         NEO
          Because I believe in something.

                         TRINITY
          What?

                         NEO
          I believe I can bring him back.

Trinity stares at him, hovering on the edge that he just
jumped off.  Her jaw sets and she starts climbing into the
chair beside him.

                         NEO
          What are you doing?

                         TRINITY
          I'm coming with you.

                         NEO
          No, you're not.

                         TRINITY
          No?  Let me tell you what I believe.
          I believe Morpheus means more to me
          than he does to you.  I believe that
          if you are serious about saving him
          then you are going to need my help
          and since I am the ranking officer
          on this ship, if you don't like it
          then I believe that you can go to
          hell, because you aren't going
          anywhere else.

There is nothing more to say except --

                         TRINITY
          Tank, load us up.


INT.  EXECUTIVE OFFICE - DAY

Agent Smith sits casually across from Morpheus who is
hunched over, his body leaking and twitching.

                         AGENT SMITH
          I'd like to share a revelation that
          I've had during my time here.  It
          came to me when I tried to classify
          your species.  I've realized that
          you are not actually mammals.

The life signs continue their chaotic patterns.

                         AGENT SMITH
          Every mammal on this planet
          instinctively develops a natural
          equilibrium with the surrounding
          environment.  But you humans do not.
          You move to an area and you multiply
          and multiply until every natural
          resource is consumed and the only
          way you can survive is to spread to
          another area.

He leans forward.

                         AGENT SMITH
          There is another organism on this
          planet that follows the same
          pattern.  Do you know what it is?  A
          virus.

He smiles.

                         AGENT SMITH
          Human beings are a disease, a cancer
          of this planet.  You are a plague.
          And we are... the cure.


INT.  MAIN DECK

Trinity and Neo hang motionless in the suspension unit.
Tank is at the operations station.

                         TANK
          Okay.  Store's open.  What do you
          need?  Besides a miracle...

                         NEO (V.O.)
          Guns.  Lots of guns.


INT.  CONSTRUCT

Racks of weapons appear and they begin to arm themselves.

                         TRINITY
          No one has ever done anything like
          this.

                         NEO
          Yeah?

He snap cocks an Uzi.

                         NEO
          That's why it's going to work.


INT.  EXECUTIVE OFFICE - DAY

Agent Smith is again at the window.

                         AGENT SMITH
          Why isn't the serum working?

                         AGENT BROWN
          Perhaps we are asking the wrong
          questions.

Agent Smith hides his knotting fist.  He is becoming
angry.  It is something that isn't supposed to happen to
Agents.

                         AGENT SMITH
          Leave me with him.

Agents Brown and Jones look at each other.

                         AGENT SMITH
          Now!

They leave and Agent Smith sits beside Morpheus.

                         AGENT SMITH
          Can you hear me, Morpheus?  I'm
          going to be honest with you.

He removes his earphone, letting it dangle over his
shoulder.

                         AGENT SMITH
          I hate this place.  This zoo.  This
          prison.  This reality, whatever you
          want to call it, I can't stand it
          any longer.  It's the smell, if
          there is such a thing.  I feel
          saturated by it.  I can taste your
          stink and every time I do, I fear
          that I've somehow been infected by
          it.

He wipes sweat from Morpheus' forehead, coating the tips
of his fingers, holding them to Morpheus' nose.

                         AGENT SMITH
          Repulsive, isn't it?

He lifts Morpheus' head, holding it tightly with both
hands.

                         AGENT SMITH
          I must get out of here, I must get
          free.  In this mind is the key.  My
          key.

Morpheus sneers through the pain.

                         AGENT SMITH
          Once Zion is destroyed, there is no
          need for me to be here.  Do you
          understand?  I need the codes.  I
          have to get inside Zion.  You have
          to tell me how.

He begins squeezing, his fingers gouging into his flesh.

                         AGENT SMITH
          You are going to tell me or you are
          going to die.


INT.  MAIN DECK

Tank sits down beside Morpheus whose face is ashen like
someone near death.  He takes hold of his hand.

                         TANK
          Hold on, Morpheus.  They're coming
          for you.  They're coming.


EXT.  GOVERNMENT BUILDING -DAY

A dark wind blows.


INT.  GOVERNMENT BUILDING - DAY

In long black coats, Trinity and Neo push through the
revolving doors.

Neo is carrying a duffel bag.  Trinity has a large metal
suitcase.  They cut across the lobby to the security
station, drawing nervous glances.

Dark glasses, game faces.

Neo calmly passes through the METAL DETECTOR which begins
to WAIL immediately.

A SECURITY GUARD moves over toward Neo, raising his metal
detection wand.

                         GUARD
          Would you please remove any metallic
          items you are carrying:  keys, loose
          change --

Neo slowly sets down his duffel bag and throws open his
coat, revealing an arsenal of guns, knives, and grenades
slung from a climbing harness.

                         GUARD
          Holy shit --

Neo and Trinity are a blur of motion.  In a split second,
three guards are dead before they hit the ground.

Chaos erupts; bystanders run for cover, POPPING CAPS
ECHOING in the stark official lobby.

A second wave of plainclothes cops and guards try to stop
them.  They are met by the MUTED SPIT of a SILENCED GUN
and the razored WHISTLE of THROWING STARS.

Weapons like extensions of their bodies, are used with the
same deadly precision as their feet and their fists.

Bodies slump down to the marbled floor while Neo and
Trinity hardly even break their stride.


INT.  EXECUTIVE OFFICE

Agents Jones and Brown burst into the room.  Agent Smith
releases Morpheus.

                         AGENT BROWN
          What were you doing?

Agent Smith recovers, replacing his ear-piece.

                         AGENT JONES
          You don't know.

                         AGENT SMITH
          Know what?

Agent Smith listens to his earphone, not believing what he
is hearing.


INT.  ELEVATORS - DAY

They get in.  Trinity immediately drops and opens the
suitcase, wiring a plastique and napalm bomb.


INT.  EXECUTIVE OFFICE - DAY

Agent Jones looks at Morpheus.

                         AGENT JONES
          I think they're trying to save him.


INT.  ELEVATOR SHAFT - DAY

Neo ratchets down a clamp onto the elevator cable.  Both
of them lock on.  He looks up the long, dark throat of the
building and takes a deep breath.

                         NEO
          There is no spoon.

Neo whips out his gun and presses it to the cable, lower
than they attached themselves.

BOOM!  The CABLE SNAPS.

The counter-weights plummet, yanking Trinity and Neo up
through the shaft as --

The elevator falls away beneath them, distending space,
filling it with the sound of WHISTLING METAL as they sear
to the top.


INT.  LOBBY - DAY

The ELEVATOR HITS the bottom.

BA-BOOM!

The MASSIVE EXPLOSION BLOWS OPEN the DOORS, fire clouds
engulfing the elevator section of the lobby.


INT.  EXECUTIVE OFFICE - DAY

The Agents hear the BLAST of FIRE ALARMS.

                         AGENT JONES
          Lower level --

                         AGENT BROWN
          They are actually attacking.

Another enormous EXPLOSION THUNDERS above them, shaking
the building.  The ALARM sounds, emergency sprinklers
begin showering the room.

Agent Smith smashes a table.

                         AGENT SMITH
          Find them and destroy them!

Agent Jones nods and touches his ear-piece.


EXT.  ROOF - DAY

The roof-access tower is now engulfed in flames as Neo and
Trinity stand amongst a pile of their fallen enemies.

Across the roof, the PILOT inside the army helicopter
watches the last of their ferocious onslaught.

                         PILOT
          I repeat, we are under attack!

Suddenly his face, his whole body dissolves, consumed by
spreading locust-like swarm of static as --

Agent Jones emerges.

Just as she drops the final Marine, Trinity sees what's
coming.

Neo sees her, the fear in her face, and he knows what is
behind him.

Screaming, he whirls, guns filling his hands with thought-
speed.

Fingers pumping, shells ejecting, dancing up and away, we
look through the sights and gunsmoke at --

The Agent blurred with motion --

Until the HAMMERS CLICK against the empty metal.

                         NEO
          Trinity!

Agent Jones charges.

                         NEO
          ... help.

His GUN BOOMS as we enter the liquid space of --

Bullet-time.

The AIR SIZZLES with wads of LEAD like angry flies as Neo
twists, bends, ducks just between them.

Agent Jones still running, narrows the gap, the bullets
coming faster until --

Neo bent impossibly back, one hand on the ground as a
spiraling gray ball shears open his shoulder.

He starts to scream as another digs a red groove across
his thigh.

He has only time to look up, to see Agent Jones standing
over him, raising his gun a final time.

                         AGENT JONES
          Only human...

Suddenly Agent Jones stops.  He hears a SHARP METAL CLICK.

Immediately, he whirls around and turns straight into the
muzzle of Trinity's .45 --

Jammed tight to his head.

                         TRINITY
          Dodge this, mutherfucker!

BOOM!  BOOM!  BOOM!  The body flies back with a flash of
mercurial light and when it hits the ground --

It is the pilot.

Trinity helps Neo up.

                         TRINITY
          Neo, how did you do that?

                         NEO
          Do what?

                         TRINITY
          You moved like they moved.  I've
          never seen anyone move that fast.

                         NEO
          It wasn't fast enough.

He checks his shoulder wound.

                         TRINITY
          Are you all right?

                         NEO
          I'm fine.  Come on, we have to keep
          moving.

Neo sees the helicopter.

                         NEO
          Can you fly that thing.

                         TRINITY
          Not yet.

She pulls out the cellular phone.


INT.  HOVERCRAFT

Tank is back at the controls.

                         TANK
          Operator.

                         TRINITY (V.O.)
          Tank, I need a pilot program for a
          military M-109 helicopter.

Tank is immediately searching the disk drawers.

                         TRINITY (V.O.)
          Hurry!

His fingers flash over the gleaming laser disks finding
one that he feeds into Trinity's Supplement Drive punching
the "load" commands on her keyboard.


EXT.  ROOF - DAY

Trinity's eyes flutter as information surges into her
brain, all the essentials of flying a helicopter absorbed
at light-speed.

                         TRINITY
          Let's go.


INT.  HALL - DAY

Marines, trying to communicate with the men on the roof,
are beginning to panic when Agent Jones comes around the
corner.

                         SERGEANT
          Sir!  Sir!  There was gunfire --
          we've lost communication with the
          roof!

                         AGENT JONES
          Remain at your posts.

                         SERGEANT
          But, sir -- the fire -- we should
          evacuate!

                         AGENT JONES
          You will do as you are ordered!


INT.  EXECUTIVE OFFICE - DAY

Agent Jones throws open the door and enters, walking
through the puddles pooling in the carpet.

Over the RUSHING WATER and the ALARMS, Agent Smith hears a
sound and understands the seriousness of the attack.

He turns to the wall of windows as the helicopter drops
INTO VIEW --

Neo is in the back bay, aiming the mounted .50 machine
gun.

                         AGENT SMITH
          No.

The GUN jumps and BULLETS EXPLODE THROUGH the WINDOW in a
CACOPHONY of CRASHING GLASS --

As the Agents go for their weapons.

But Neo is too close, the .50 caliber too fast and BULLETS
are everywhere, PERFORATING the room.

Agent Smith is hit first, his body jack-knifing back,
blood arcing out with a sudden flash of light --

Then Agent Brown, his GUN still FIRING as his body falls.

And finally Agent Jones.

Neo stares at Morpheus, trying to will him into action.

                         NEO
          Get up, Morpheus!  Get up!

Neo grabs the climbing rope and attaches one end to his
harness.


INT.  HALL - DAY

Just outside the executive office, three Marines blister
with snow-static.


INT.  EXECUTIVE OFFICE - DAY

Slowly, Morpheus lifts his face into the room's rain.
When he finally opens his eyes, they are again dark and
flashing with fire.

He rises from the chair, snapping his handcuffs just as
the Agents enter the adjoining room.

Agent Smith stops and sees Morpheus run past the open
door.

                         AGENT SMITH
          Nooo!

He FIRES SWEEPING ACROSS the sheetrocked WALL in a perfect
line.

For an instant, we see the BULLETS SHRED, PUNCTURING the
WALL, searing through the wet air with jet trails of
chalk.

And as Morpheus starts his dive for the window, a bullet
buries itself in his leg --

Knocking him off balance.

                         NEO
          He won't make it.

Morpheus lunges, out of control --

As Neo spins, every move a whip crack, snapping the other
rope-end on to a bolted bar as --

Morpheus begins to fall, when Neo hurls himself into the
wide blue empty space --

Flying for a moment.

The rope snaking out behind him; an umbilical cord
attached to a machine.

As their two bodies, set in motion, rushing at each other
on a seemingly magnetic course until --

They collide.

Almost bouncing free of each other, arms, legs scrambling,
hands searching in furious desperation, finding hold and
clinging.

Until the LINE ends, SNAPPING taut, cracking their fragile
embrace.  Morpheus tumbles, legs flipping over, falling
down --

The ground deliriously distant --

As Neo snatches hold of his mentor's still handcuffed
wrist.

                         NEO
          Gotcha!


INT.  MAIN DECK

Tank stares at the screen, his mouth agape.

                         TANK
          He is the One.  He's gotta be... but
          why?  He's gotta be!


EXT.  GOVERNMENT BUILDING

Trinity is already pulling the copter up and away.

Anger boils up into Agent Smith and he points his gun,
targeting the helicopter.  He'll bring them all down.

The helicopter crabs through the canyon of skyscrapers and
just as Agent Smith FIRES --

It disappears behind a building, Agent Smith's BULLETS
FRACTURING the huge PANES of skyscraper GLASS.

                         AGENT SMITH
          Find them!  Track them!


EXT.  ROOFTOP - DAY

The helicopter touches down on the skyscraper in a swirl
of dust and gravel.  Neo has an arm around Morpheus,
holding him up.

                         TRINITY
          Morpheus!

She runs at him, slamming her arms around him.

                         MORPHEUS
          Do you believe it now, Trinity?

Trinity looks at Neo.

                         NEO
          Morpheus, the Oracle... she told
          me --

                         MORPHEUS
          She told you exactly what you needed
          to hear.  That's all.  Sooner or
          later, Neo, you're going to realize
          just like I did the difference
          between knowing the path and walking
          the path.


INT.  MAIN DECK

The PHONE RINGS.

                         MORPHEUS (V.O.)
          Tank.

                         TANK
          Goddamn!  It's good to hear your
          voice, sir!

                         MORPHEUS (V.O.)
          We need an exit.

                         TANK
          Got one ready, sir.  Subway.  State
          and Balbo.

                         MORPHEUS (V.O.)
          We're on our way --


EXT.  ROOFTOP - DAY

We rush at the roof access door as it suddenly slams open
and the three agents charge out.

But Neo, Trinity and Morpheus are already gone.

                         AGENT SMITH
          Damnit!

                         AGENT BROWN
          The trace was completed.

                         AGENT JONES
          We have their position.

                         AGENT BROWN
          The extermination unit is in place.

                         AGENT JONES
          Order the strike.

Agent Smith can't stand listening to them.  He moves to
the edge of the building, looking out at the surrounding
city.

                         AGENT SMITH
          They're not out yet.


INT.  SUBWAY STATION - DAY

An old man sits hunched in the far corner of the station,
shadows gathered around him like blankets.  Mumbling, he
nurses from a bottle of Thunderbird when --

A PHONE begins to RING.

Neo leads Trinity and Morpheus bounding over a set of
turnstiles towards the ringing phone inside a graffiti-
covered booth.

                         NEO
          Let's go!  You first, Morpheus.

Morpheus gets in and answers the phone.

Lost in the shadow, the Old Man watches as Morpheus
disappears, the phone dropping, dangling by its cord.  His
eyes grow wide, glowing white in the dark.


EXT.  ROOFTOP - DAY

Agent Smith stares, his face twisted with hate.  He will
never be free of the Matrix.

He starts to turn from the edge of the building when he
suddenly hears it, his head whipping around, staring --


INT.  SUBWAY - OLD MAN'S POV - DAY

Through the Old Man's eyes as the world begins to RUMBLE.


TRINITY

hangs up the phone, then turns to Neo.

                         TRINITY
          Neo, I have to tell you something.
          I don't know what it means or even
          if it matters but I feel I have to
          say it.

The RUMBLE GROWS, the ground beginning to shake.

                         TRINITY
          I've never told anyone this before.
          I think I've been afraid to.

Behind her, the PHONE begins to RING.

                         TRINITY
          When I went to the Oracle, she told
          me... she told me that I would meet
          a man.  And that I would fall in
          love...

The RUMBLE RISES, drowning her voice.  Neo is drawn
towards her, their lips close enough to kiss when a TRAIN
BLASTS into the station.

For a moment, they are frozen by the strobing lights of
the train until Neo whispers in her ear.

                         NEO
          Promise me you'll tell me the rest?

She nods as he closes the booth.  The PHONE RINGS once
more before she lifts the receiver when --

In the darkness of the far corner, Neo sees the old man in
the flashing train-light as he becomes --

Agent Smith, raising a fistful of black gun-metal.

                         NEO
          No!

The GUN FIRES, the BULLET flying at her, BURSTING through
the PLASTIC WINDOW just as --

Trinity disappears.

The headset hanging in the air as the BULLET HITS,
SHATTERING the EAR-PIECE.


INT.  HOVERCRAFT

Trinity blinks, shivering as her conscious exits the
Construct.

                         TRINITY
          Neo!

                         TANK
          What the hell just happened?

                         TRINITY
          An Agent!  You have to send me back!

                         TANK
          I can't!


INT.  SUBWAY STATION - DAY

The destroyed phone dangles in the empty booth.  Neo turns
to Agent Smith whose gun stares at him like a third eye.

                         AGENT SMITH
          Mr. Anderson.


INT.  MAIN DECK

Morpheus and Trinity stand behind Tank riveted to the
scrolling code.

                         TRINITY
          Run, Neo.  Run.


INT.  SUBWAY STATION - DAY

Neo looks at the dead escalator that rises up behind him.
Slowly he turns back and in his eyes we sees something
different, something fixed and hard like a gunfighter's
resolve.

There is no past or future in these eyes.  There is only
what is.


INT.  MAIN DECK

Trinity is unable to understand.

                         TRINITY
          What is he doing?

                         MORPHEUS
          He's beginning to believe.


INT.  SUBWAY STATION - DAY

Neo whip-draws his gun flashpoint speed of lightning as --

Smith OPENS FIRE.

GUN REPORT THUNDERS through the underground, both men
BLASTING, moving at impossible speed.

For a blinking moment we enter BULLET-TIME.

Gun flash tongues curl from Neo's gun, bullets float
forward like a plane moving across the sky, cartridges
cartwheel into space.

An instant later they are nearly on top of each other,
rolling up out of a move that is almost a mirrored
reflection of the other --

Each jamming their gun tight to the other's head.

They freeze in a kind of embrace; Neo sweating, panting,
Agent Smith machine-calm.

Agent Smith smiles.

                         AGENT SMITH
          You're empty.

Neo pulls the TRIGGER.  CLICK.

                         NEO
          So are you.

The smile falls.  Agent Smith yanks his TRIGGER.

CLICK.

Agent Smith's face warps with rage and he attacks, fists
flying at furious speed, blows and counters, Neo
retreating as --

A knife-hand opens his forearm, and a kick sends him
slamming back against a steel column.

Stunned, he ducks just under a punch that CRUNCHES into
the BEAM, STEEL CHUNKS EXPLODING like shrapnel.

Behind him, Neo leaps into the air, delivering a neck-
snapping reverse round-house.  Agent Smith's glasses fly
off and he glares at Neo; his eyes ice blue.

                         AGENT SMITH
          I'm going to enjoy watching you die,
          Mr. Anderson.

Agent Smith attacks with unrelenting fury, fists pounding
Neo like jackhammers.


INT.  HOVERCRAFT

Trinity watches Neo as his body jerks, mouth coughing
blood, his LIFE SIGNS GOING WILD.

                         TRINITY
          Jesus, he's killing him!


INT.  SUBWAY STATION - DAY

Agent Smith grabs hold of him, lifting him into the air,
hurling him against the curved wall of the train tunnel,
where he falls inches from the electrified third-rail.

The Agent is about to jump down and press his attack when
he hears something.  From deep in the tunnel, like an
animal cry; a BURST of HIGH-SPEED METAL GRINDING against
METAL.

The sound of an ON-COMING TRAIN.

Neo tries to get up.  Agent Smith jumps down onto the
tracks and drop-kicks him in the face.

The world again begins to shake, RUMBLING as the TRAIN
NEARS.

                         AGENT SMITH
          Do you hear that, Mr. Anderson?

Agent Smith grabs Neo in a choke-hold forcing him to look
down the tracks, the train's headlight burning a hole in
the darkness.

                         AGENT SMITH
          That is the sound of inevitability.

Neo sees it coming and he starts to fight.

                         AGENT SMITH
          It is the sound of your death.

There is another METAL SCREECH, much LOUDER, CLOSER, as
Agent Smith tightens his hold.  Neo is unable to breathe.

                         AGENT SMITH
          Good-bye, Mr. Anderson.

The TRAIN ROARS at them, swallowing Agent Smith's words.
The veins bulge in Neo's head, as he grits through the
pain.

He is not ready to die.

                         NEO
          My name is Neo.

Impossibly, he hurls himself straight up, smashing Smith
against the concrete ceiling of the tunnel.

They fall as the sound and fury of the TRAIN EXPLODES into
the station.

Neo backflips up off the tracks just as --

The train barrels over Agent Smith.

Neo stands, knees shaking, when the train slams on its
emergency brake.  With an ear-splitting SHRIEK of tortured
rails, the TRAIN slows, part of it still in the station.

Neo turns, limping, starting to run, racing for the
escalator --

As the train comes to a stop and the doors of the last car
open; Agent Smith bursts out in furious pursuit, his
glasses again intact.


INT.  HOVERCRAFT

Tank searches the Matrix.

                         TRINITY
          What just happened?

                         TANK
          I don't know.  I lost him.

                         MORPHEUS
          He's on the run --

Suddenly, a SIREN sounds.

                         TANK
          Oh shit!

Morpheus bolts to the ladder.


INT.  COCKPIT

Morpheus climbs into the cockpit.  On the hologram radar,
he sees the Sentinels.

                         TRINITY
          Oh no.

Trinity is behind him.

                         TRINITY
          How long?

                         MORPHEUS
          Five minutes.  Maybe six.

Morpheus lifts the headset.

                         MORPHEUS
          Tank, charge the E.M.P.

                         TANK (V.O.)
          Yes, sir.

                         TRINITY
          You can't use that until Neo is out!

                         MORPHEUS
          I know, Trinity.  Don't worry.  He's
          going to make it.


EXT.  CITY STREET - DAY

A BUSINESSMAN walks along the sidewalk, wheeling and
dealing into his cell phone when it disappears, snatched
by Neo as he flashes by.

                         MAN
          What the shit -- My phone!

The Man turns to call for help and when he turns back, it
is Agent Smith.

Neo is in a full out sprint, spinning and weaving away
from every pedestrian, every potential Agent.

He flips open the cell phone and dials long distance.


INT.  HOVERCRAFT

Tank answers.

                         TANK
          Operator.

                         NEO (V.O.)
          Mr. Wizard, get me the fuck out of
          here!


EXT.  CITY STREET - DAY

A pickup truck swerves onto the sidewalk behind him,
driven by Agent Jones.

                         NEO
          Hurry, Tank!  I got some serious
          pursuit!

Neo dodges down an alley.


INT.  HOVERCRAFT

The KEYBOARD CLICKING, Tank searches for an exit.  Trinity
screams into the headset.

                         TRINITY
          Neo, you better get your ass back
          here!


EXT.  ALLEY

Neo burns down the alley, the pickup fishtailing behind
him, gaining fast.

                         NEO
          I'm trying, Trinity.  I'm trying.

He runs, feet digging, legs pumping and just before the
truck buries him --

He dives into a gangway at the last second.


INT.  MAIN DECK

Tank speed-reads the reams of Matrix code.

                         TANK
          I got a patch on an old exit.
          Wabash and Lake.  A hotel.  Room
          303.


EXT.  CITY STREET

Neo springs from the gangway, head swiveling in all
directions.

                         NEO
          Which way?  Which way?

                         TANK (V.O.)
          Duck!

He ducks as a SWARM of BULLETS CHEW into the BRICK WALL
behind him and spring full bore down the street, Agent
Smith right behind him.

                         TANK (V.O.)
          Go straight!

Neo hauls ass, juking, ducking and diving, feet hardly
touching the ground.

                         TANK (V.O.)
          Watch for those Girl Scouts!

Agent Jones emerges from a bus full of Girl Scouts that
are unloading on his right.

Neo veers left as Agent Brown rises from behind a
newspaper up ahead.

                         TANK (V.O.)
          Left!  Take a left!

He does, finding himself in an open market --

That teems with people.

Neo screams and kamikazes his way down the little avenues
lined with vendors and shops.

He careens through the labyrinth, out of control.  And at
every turn there is an Agent; appearing from crowds,
behind fish counters, tent flaps, and crates.

Neo spins.  He can't shake them.  They are everywhere.

He dives from the maze down a service alley.


INT.  MAIN DECK

Tank reaches out to the monitor.

                         TANK
          No!  Not down there!


EXT.  ALLEY

It is a dead end.

Neo turns back as the Agents emerge from the market.

                         NEO
          Uh, help!  Need a little help!


INT.  MAIN DECK

Tank frantically scans the monitor like a road map.

                         TANK
          That door on your left.


EXT.  ALLEY

Neo dives for it but --

                         NEO
          It's locked.

                         TANK (V.O.)
          Kick it in!  Kick it in!

Peeling back, Neo almost kicks the door from its hinges,
lunging from the Agents' BULLETS.


INT.  APARTMENT BUILDING

Neo springs up the old crooked apartment building stairs.

                         TANK (V.O.)
          Now down that hall.

He is halfway down the hall, running in sharp long strides
when a DOOR EXPLODES open at the end.

                         TANK
          Shit!  The door on your left.

Neo lurches, kicking in an apartment door.

                         TANK
          No!  Other left!

He whirls back to his other left, battering through the
DOOR which SPLINTERS, PERFORATED by BULLETS.

Tank barks directions in Neo's ear, guiding him zigzag
through the apartment.

                         TANK (V.O.)
          Right!  Straight, then right!

An old woman watches TV as Neo blurs past her and into her
kitchen, where another woman is chopping vegetables.

                         TANK (V.O.)
          That window!

Neo throws it open, leaping for the fire escape just as a
knife buries itself in the window casing.

                         TANK
          Down!  Down!

Tumbling down the RATTLING FIRE ESCAPE, Neo leaps the last
ten feet into the alley below with Agent Brown right
behind him.


INT.  MAIN DECK

Finger on the monitor, Tank traces Neo's path.

                         TANK
          That's it!  You're almost there!
          That fire escape at the end of the
          alley!


EXT.  ALLEY

Neo scrapes himself to his feet, broken and bleeding,
charging for the end of the alley.

Agent Smith suddenly pauses as if recognizing something;
the faded NEON BUZZES:  Chase Hotel.


INT.  HOVERCRAFT

Tank loads the exit.

                         TANK
          I'm going to make the call.

                         MORPHEUS
          Do it!

Suddenly, the lights go red.

                         TRINITY
          No.

Morpheus looks up.

                         MORPHEUS
          Here they come.


EXT.  SEWER MAIN

The Sentinels open and shift like killer kaleidoscopes as
they attack, slamming down onto the Nebuchadnezzar.


INT.  HOVERCRAFT

The hovercraft booms down as they hit.  Morpheus opens the
lock on the EMP detonator.

Trinity watches him.

                         MORPHEUS
          He's going to make it.


EXT.  ALLEY - DAY

Neo scrambles up the fire escape as BULLETS spark and
RICOCHET around him.

On the third floor, he kicks in the window, jumping into
the hall.  The doors count backwards:  310... 309...


INT.  MAIN DECK

Another systems ALARM sounds.

                         TANK
          They've burned through the outer
          shields.

                         TRINITY
          Hurry, Neo.


INT.  HALL - DAY

Neo can hear the PHONE RINGING.

305... 304...

Agent Brown reaches the broken window behind him just as
Neo grabs the handle to 303, throwing open the door to
find --

Agent Smith, waiting, .45 cocked.

Neo can't move -- can't think --

BOOM.


INT.  MAIN DECK

Neo's body jerks, and everyone hears it as the LIFE
MONITORS SNAP FLATLINE.

Trinity screams.  Morpheus stumbles back in disbelief.

                         MORPHEUS
          No, it can't be.  It can't be.

LASERS suddenly SEAR through the main deck as the
Sentinels slice open the hull.


INT.  HALL - DAY

Three holes in his chest, Neo falls to the blue shag
carpeting, blood smearing down the wall paper.  Agent
Smith stands over him, still aiming, taking no chances.

                         AGENT SMITH
          Check him.


INT.  MAIN DECK

Amid the destruction raining around her, Trinity takes
hold of Neo's body.

                         TRINITY
          Neo...


INT.  HALL - DAY

Kneeling beside him, Agent Brown checks his vital signs.

                         AGENT BROWN
          He's gone.

Agent Smith smiles, standing over him.

                         AGENT SMITH
          Good-bye, Mr. Anderson.


INT.  MAIN DECK

In tears, Morpheus takes hold of the EMP switch.

Trinity whispers in Neo's ear.

                         TRINITY
          Neo, please, listen to me.  I
          promised to tell you the rest.  The
          Oracle, she told me that I'd fall in
          love and that man, the man I loved
          would be the One.  You see?  You
          can't be dead, Neo, you can't be
          because I love you.  You hear me?  I
          love you!

Her eyes close and she kisses him, believing in all her
heart that he will feel her lips and know that they speak
the truth.


INT.  HOTEL HALL - DAY

He does.  And they do.

His eyes snap open.


INT.  MAIN DECK

Trinity screams as the MONITORS JUMP back to LIFE.  Tank
and Morpheus look at each other.

It is a miracle.

                         TRINITY
          Now get up!


INT.  HALL - DAY

Holding his chest, Neo struggles to get up.  At the end of
the hall, the Agents wait for the elevator when Agent
Smith glances back.  He rips off his sunglasses looking at
Neo as if he were looking at a ghost.

Neo gets to his feet, all three Agents grabbing for their
GUNS.  As one, they FIRE.

                         NEO
          No!

Neo raises his hands and the bullets, like a cloud of
obedient bees, slow and come to a stop.  They hang frozen
in space, fixed like stainless steel stars.

The Agents are unable to absorb what they are seeing.

Neo plucks one of the bullets from the air.  We see him
and the hall reflected in the bright casing.  We MOVE
CLOSER until the bullet FILLS our VISION and the distorted
reflection morphs, becoming the "real" image.

He drops the bullet and the others fall to the floor.

Neo looks out, now able to see through the curtain of the
Matrix.  For a moment, the walls, the floor, even the
Agents become a rushing stream of code.


INT.  MAIN DECK

All three stare transfixed with awe as the scrolling code
accelerates, faster and faster, as if the machine language
was unable to keep up or perhaps describe what is
happening.

They begin to blur with brilliant saturated color images
of Neo standing in the hall.

                         TANK
          How...?!

                         MORPHEUS
          He is the One.  He is the One!

An EXPLOSION shakes the entire ship.


INT.  HALL

Agent Smith screams, his calm machine-like expression
shredding with pure rage.

He rushes Neo.  His attack is ferocious but Neo blocks
each blow easily.  Then with one quick strike to the chest
he sends Agent Smith flying backwards.

For the first time since their inception, the Agents know
fear.

Agent Smith gets up and attacks again but as he lunges,
Neo disappears.

Spinning around he looks to the others and feels
something, like a tremor before a quake, something deep,
something that is going to change everything.

Suddenly a SEARING sound stabs through his earpiece as his
chest begins to swell, then balloon as --

Neo bursts up out of him.  Agent Smith screams, fighting
what seems inevitable as Neo absorbs and envelops him,
overtaking Smith as if he were now an Agent, until --

Only Neo is left.

Neo faces the remaining Agents.  They look at each other,
the same idea striking simultaneously --

They run.


INT.  MAIN DECK

Sentinels are everywhere destroying the ship.  A LASER
cuts its way towards Morpheus who stands at the EMP
detonator.

                         TRINITY
          Neo!


INT.  HALL

Again he hears her.  He reacts to the RINGING PHONE,
rushing towards it even as --


INT.  MAIN DECK

The LASERS burn towards Morpheus.  On the screen we see
Neo dive for the phone as --

The LASER HITS.

                         TRINITY
          Now!

Morpheus turns the key.


INT.  OVERFLOW PIT

A blinding shock of white light floods the chamber;
Sentinels blink and fall instantly dead, filling the pit
with their cold metal carcasses.


INT.  HOVERCRAFT

In the still darkness, only the humans are alive.

                         TRINITY
          Neo?

His eyes open.  Tears pour from her smiling eyes as he
reaches up to touch her.

And she kisses him; it seems like it might last forever.

                                            FADE TO BLACK.

FADE IN:

CLOSE ON COMPUTER SCREEN

as in the opening.  The cursor beating steadily, waiting.

A PHONE begins to RING.

It is answered and the screen fills instantly with the
trace program.  After a long beat, we recognize Neo's
voice.

                         NEO (V.O.)
          Hi.  It's me.  I know you're out
          there.  I can feel you now.

We CLOSE IN ON the racing columns of numbers shimmering
across the screen.

                         NEO (V.O.)
          I imagine you can also feel me.

We DIVE THROUGH the numbers, SURGING UP THROUGH the
darkness, SUCKED TOWARDS a tight constellation of stars.

                         NEO (V.O.)
          I know you're real proud of this
          world you've built, the way it
          works, all the nice little rules and
          such, but I've got some bad news.

We realize that the constellation is actually the holes in
the mouthpiece of a phone.  Seen from inside.

                         NEO (V.O.)
          I've decided to make a few changes.

We SHOOT THROUGH the holes as Neo hangs up the phone.

He steps out of the phone booth and slides on a pair of
sunglasses.  He looks up and we RISE.

HIGHER...

... and HIGHER, until the city is miles below.

After a moment, Neo BLASTS BY us, his long black coat
billowing like a black leather cape as he flies faster
then a speeding bullet.

                                            FADE OUT.

                         THE END




